You'll often want to test more
complicated conditions than the simple
ones we've used so far in the course, and
the good news is that Python lets us
produce quite complex expressions. So
what I'm going to do is create a new
file in our project. We're going to call
it conditions.py.
If we wanted to check if someone was of working age, we can test for their age being between 16 and 65, for example.
Now that would get a bit
messy if we tested for their age being
greater than equal to 16 and then used
another test to see if it was less than equal to 65,
but we can perform both
tests in one conditional expression.
So let's have a look at that, so I'm going
to type age equals int input, and obviously
using the parentheses as well, and How
old are you? and a space
and then two right parentheses to close
the line. Then on line 3, we're going
to combine those conditions, as I
mentioned: if age is greater than equal
to 16 and age less than equal to 65 colon.
Then we've going to print Have a good date work,
in double quotes and with parentheses, as you can see. So here, if age is greater than
equal to 16 and is also less than equal
to 65, then the message on line 4
is going to be outputted. So notice that we
had to repeat age in the expressions.
What we have here is a complex
expression made up of two simpler expressions.
Firstly we've got the
expression, age greater than equal to 16.
That's one expression, then we've got
another expression, age less than equal to 65.
So either one of those expressions
can evaluate to true.
The complete expression will only be true with both
parts true.
That's because we use the word and.
Alright, so let's talk about using and.
So let's say that you're asked this question:
Would you like an uncomfortable
seat and an ice-cream?
If you answer yes to that question you may enjoy the ice-cream but you won't be very comfortable.
You've agreed to both parts of the condition.
Now on the other hand, the question may
been phrased as: Would you like an uncomfortable
seat or an ice-cream? Now
that allows you to choose either one of
the options. This analogy falls down
slightly because in English, there's an
implication that you can only have one
or the other. In programming languages,
both conditions could be true. So let's
see the possible results of evaluating
expressions using and, compared to using or.
Alright, so here's the and Truth Table.
So to find out the result of using
and with two conditions, read the value at
the intersection of the two values
that are being ANDed together. So the next
four slides will show the results
for each of the combinations of True and
False. So True and True, as you can see here,
no surprises, is True. True and False, well
that's going to give us a False. False
and True is going to give us a False,
and lastly, False and False gives us a False.
So that was the and truth table. Now let's look at the or Truth Table.
So the or Truth Table works in the same way but the results will be different, of course.
So to find the result of using or with
two conditions, read the value at the
intersection of the two values that are
being ORed together.
So the first one, True or True, well that gives us True.
True or False, that also gives us True.
False or True equals True, and lastly,
False or False, well that'll give us False.
Alright, so that's how AND works,
and also we'd had a brief discussion of
OR, which will be coming up in more
detail. Both parts of the condition for
and, though, have to be true for the overall
condition to evaluate to true.
So I'm gonna run the program now and we'll test that with various inputs, just to make sure
it works as we think it should. So How old
are you? I'm going to enter 34, initially.
We get the message printed out, so that's
working. To test it fully, we should
really enter four more values. We need to
test the value less than 16
and a value greater than 65. So let's start by doing that.
So I'm going to enter 12 for the first test.
We've got no output there. Run it again.
I'm gonna enter 78 this time. No output
again. The final two tests are to make
sure the code works when we enter 16 or 65, so let's try that.
16, we get the message there.
One more time, 65 this time, Have a good day at work, we get the message as well.
So our program, at this point, is doing
what we wanted, but always make sure you
test all paths through your code. Alright,
so in the next video we're going to have
a look at the suggestion that I've got
from IntelliJ on line 3. You can see it
says Simplify chained comparison. We'll
talk about that in the next video.